---
layout: post
title: "_Half the Sky_ - Sheryl WuDunn and Nicholas Kristof"
categories: books
---

Pulitzer Prize winners Sheryl WuDunn and Nicholas Kristof champion gender
equality in their 2009 book, _Half the Sky: Turning Oppression into Opportunity
for Women Worldwide_. The couple maintains that slavery and totalitarianism were
the most significant global injustices of the 19th and 20th century,
respectively. They argue that the 21st century’s greatest wrong is gender
inequality, manifested most extremely by forced prostitution, gender-based
violence, and maternal mortality.

### Forced Prostitution

Ms. WuDunn and Mr. Kristof suggest that the discussion of forced prostitution is
often distracted by disagreement about prostitution in general. One camp favors
the legalization and regulation of prostitution among consenting adults, so that
all parties may benefit from legal protections. Another arguement is that
prostitution is inherently wrong, and legalization and regulation policies do
not actually diminish a parallel, illegal buisiness. Ms. WuDunn and Mr. Kristof
stress that the debate surrounding prostitution impedes action against forced
prostitution. The authors also share that while they originally thought that
legalizing and regulating prostitution would be helpful, they have come to
believe that legalized prostitution does not reduce the numbers of child
prostitutes or forced prostitutes.

To further complicate the discussion around forced prostitution, is the reality
that the difference between willing prostitution and forced prostitution is not
always clear. Consider adult women who seem to be volitional sex workers. The
women may have been coerced in to sex work as children, forced to develop a
dependency on drugs, or made to feel so stigmatized by society, that while they
are free to leave, a new life doesn’t seem like a realistic option.

The authors suggest that we come away from the debate regarding legal vs.
illegal prostitution, and willing vs. forced prostition, and focus more on
creating vocational opportunities for women. To get involved in microfinancing
women, explore
[Kiva](https://www.kiva.org/lend-by-category/women){:target="_blank"} or
[Women’s World Banking](https://www.womensworldbanking.org/){:target="_blank"}.

### Gender Based Violence

_Half the Sky_ highlights the many ways in which girls and women experience
violence that is directed at them specifically because of their gender. For
example, research suggests that girl fetuses are disproportionately aborted.
When resources become less abundant for families, girl children often receive
less medical attention, food, and education compared to their brothers. Women
also continue to endure honor killings, genital cutting, and systematic rape.

The authors point out that both men and women internalize and reproduce the
misogynistic values that create cultures of violence against women. Mothers
sometimes give their daughters less care than their sons, and mothers-in-law and
women brothel managers are often responsible for beating the younger women. Many
women also agree that depending on the situation, men have the right to beat
their wives.

Ms. WuDunn and Mr. Kristof press that education is one of the surest ways to
help people escape a mindset that subordinates women. They recommend supporting
[_Campaign for Female Education (CAMFED)_](https://www.creatinghope.org/who-we-are.html){:target="_blank"},
and the [_Afghan Institute of Learning_](https://camfed.org/){:target="_blank"}.

### Maternal Mortality

Maternal mortality ratio (MMR) refers to the number of maternal deaths for every
100,000 live births. In 1987, the United Nation’s Safe Motherhood Initiative
endeavored to reduce maternal mortality by 50 percent by the year 2000. Then, in
2000, the UN set a Millenium Development Goal of reducing maternal mortality by
75 percent by 2015. Neither goal was met. While childbirth can be dangerous for
women worldwide, it can be especially lethal to those that can’t receive
emergency obstetric care such as C-sections.

Maternal morbidity refers to injuries a mother sustains during pregnancy or
childbirth. For every woman that dies in childbirth, there are far more that
suffer significant injuries. Obstructed labor and lack of medical care during
childbirth can cause fistulas, for example. A fistula is an abnormal connection
between two parts of the body. They are preventable and treatable at low costs.

Ensuring that mothers survive childbirth and thrive after giving birth is the
priority of several effective organizations such as
[_Averting Maternal Death_](https://www.mailman.columbia.edu/research/averting-maternal-death-and-disability-amdd){:target="_blank"}
and [_Disability and Fistula Foundation_](https://www.fistulafoundation.org/){:target="_blank"}.

---
References

Kristof, N.D. & WuDunn, S. (2009). _Half the Sky: Turning Oppression into Opportunity for Women Worldwide_. New York, NY: Alfred A. Knopf.
