---
layout: post
title:  "_Why Are All the Black Kids Sitting Together in the Cafeteria?_ - Beverly Daniel Tatum"
date:   2019-12-09 17:17:11 +0700
categories: books
---

The question may be uncomfortable because most of us don’t have enough practice
talking about race. Hopefully the more we learn and talk about race, the more
comfortable the topic becomes. Beverly Daniel Tatum is an American educator,
administrator, clinical psychologist, and author of the 2017 book, _Why Are All
the Black Kids Sitting Together in the Cafeteria?_ Her book title, she relates,
is based on the most common question people ask her. Dr. Tatum explains that
Black students in the United States often sit together at lunch because in a
culture that constantly reminds them of their race, Black students find safety
and support by sitting with other members of their racial group.

Dr. Tatum suggests that the more important questions we should be asking
ourselves are, “What does it mean to be Black? What does it mean to be White?”
and “What can I do to further dismantle the system of advantage based on race?”
In the United States today, where White culture is dominant culture, we should
strive to be race-conscious and recognize that our social system still unfairly
benefits White people and disadvantages Black people. Progress has definitely
been made over the years, but if we want to continue to break down the racist
system, we need to keep working. Here are Dr. Tatum's suggestions:

### Educate

Stereotypes about marginalized groups are often based not on what people know,
but what people don’t know. Black figures, literature, and art, for example, are
underrepresented in parts of our society such as curricula, entertainment, and
advertisements.

Because positive images of marginalized groups are not pervasive in mainstream
culture, people should seek out the voices and work of marginalized group
members. In order to have a comprehensive understanding of society we must know
more about all groups.

### Reflect

Think about your own identity. Along with race, there are other social
categories in which people find themselves either in the dominant or subordinate
status. Class, gender, ability (mental and physical), and religion, are several
characteristics that affect our experience in society. An individual may be
targeted by multiple isms - classism, sexism, ableism, anti-Semitism - making
their marginized experience in society more intense.

White people who identify strongly with another subordinate status may feel that
their Whiteness is less meaningful. For example, European Jews, White members of
the LGBTQ community, or White people who grew up poor, may struggle with the
idea that they are privileged in any way. It’s important to understand, however,
that while a White person’s socio-economic class, or any other characteristic,
may have been disadvantageous to them, their race still systematically benefits
them.

Many people occupy a combination of dominant and subordinate statuses. If we
draw on our own experiences of subordination, we may be better able to empathize
with another targeted group’s experience.

### Acknowledge

We shouldn’t try to be “color-blind.” A perspective that doesn’t recognize the
significance of race overlooks the disparate histories of the races and denies
that Black people have a different experience in society than White people.

Acknowledging the privileges associated with being White, and the disadvantages
associated with being Black, is necessary to breaking the cycle of racism.

### Challenge

Discriminatory behavior requires explicit opposition. If we see or hear
injustice, we must object. When we allow demeaning comments or jokes to go
unchallenged, for example, our silence serves as collusion.

We should all feel confident and obliged to voice resistance when we recognize
unfairness. One individual speaking up can have powerful effects on norms in
friend groups, families, schools or workplaces.

Listen to Dr. Tatum talk about [_Why Are All the Black Kids Sitting Together in
the Cafeteria?_](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=PGZniOuoREU){:target="_blank"}

---
References

Tatum, B.D. (2017). _Why are all the black kids sitting together in the
cafeteria: And other conversations about race._ New York, NY: Basic Books.
