---
layout: post
title: _Orlando_
book_author: Virginia Woolf
categories: books
image: orlando.jpg
---

Virginia Woolf’s 1928 novel, _Orlando_, follows an English character of the same
name from the late 1500s to 1928. We meet Orlando, the handsome young son of a
noble English family, sometime during the reign of Queen Elizabeth I. Orlando
falls in love, is banished from court life, successfully redeems himself, and
becomes the English Ambassador to Turkey. His adventures continue when he wakes
up one morning in Constantinople - as a woman. The change in gender does not
dramatically change the protagonist: “Orlando had become a woman—there is no
denying it. But in every other respect, Orlando remained precisely as he had
been. The change of sex, though it altered their future, did nothing whatever to
alter their identity.” Regardless of gender, Orlando questions the value of life
and human relationships, but finds inspiration in animals and nature.

# Orlando the Man

Orlando’s despondent thinking takes hold of him even during some of the best
moments of his life. As a young man during a Great Frost, Orlando falls deeply
in love for the first time with the athletic, exotic, Russian princess Sasha.
Her captivating presence exhilarates Orlando. The two lovers skate for hours on
the frozen Thames and lose themselves in conversation. Throughout his escapades
with Sasha, however, “suddenly Orlando would fall into one of his moods of
melancholy; the sight of the old woman hobbling over the ice might be the cause
of it, or nothing...‘All ends in death,’ Orlando would say...his face clouded
with gloom.” Despite Orlando’s good fortune - his social class, health, beauty -
and his enchanting companion, he can’t help but feel depressed at times, without
warning or cause.

Orlando suffers from his own mind’s occasional despair, and from the
wounding treatment he endures from others. When Sasha breaks Orlando’s heart,
Orlando withdraws from society. After many years of seclusion, he invites a
writer whom he respects to visit him. Following his stay at Orlando’s estate,
Mr. Green publishes _A Visit to a Nobleman in the Country_, an unkind mockery of
Orlando. Humiliated, Orlando burns his own writings (everything but his most
dear manuscript, “The Oak Tree”), and says he is finished with men. He feels
that he “need never speak to another man or woman so long as he lived; if his
dogs did not develop the faculty of speech; if he never met a poet or a princess
again, he might make out what years remained to him in tolerable content.”
Sasha’s wordless abandonment and Mr. Green’s lengthy characterization prompt him
to question love and friendship alike. Orlando again isolates himself, better
able to tolerate solitude than the rebuffs of people he admires.

Thankfully, the natural world never betrays Orlando the way people do. Orlando
consistently relies on nature to calm and inspire him. Laying under his favorite
oak tree pacifies his restless spirit: “He loved, beneath all this summer
transiency, to feel the earth’s spine beneath him; for such he took the hard
root of the oak tree to be...for he felt the need of something which he could
attach his floating heart to; the heart that tugged at his side…” The oak tree,
firmly rooted in the ground, offers Orlando dependability in an unpredictable
world.

Orlando finds his dogs similarly reliable. After the humiliation Orlando
sustains from Mr. Green, Orlando is confident, “Two things alone remained to him
in which he now put any trust: dogs and nature; an elk-hound and a rose bush.
The world, in all its variety, life in all its complexity, had shrunk to
that...he called his hounds to him and strode through the Park.” Orlando
believes he has seen what the wide world has to offer, and his encounters with
disappointment and betrayal occasion him to limit his exposure to other people.
He is content to spend his time outdoors exclusively with his dogs.

# Orlando the Woman

Orlando’s trust in dogs proves worthy. Around thirty years old, while serving in
Turkey, Orlando falls into a long, magical sleep, and awakes as a woman. Upon
awakening, one of her dogs is the first by her side. Orlando, “called her
Seleuchi hound, which had never left her bed all these days, though half
famished with hunger.” Orlando feeds and brushes her dog, “...and thus, attended
by a lean dog...the Ambassador of Great Britain at the Court of the Sultan left
Constantinople.” Another of Orlando’s dogs is the first to welcome her home to
England. As she arrives, the deer in the park all follow the coach to the front
door, and Orlando’s elk hound, Canute, throws himself upon Orlando. All of the
dogs greet her enthusiastically, and “No one showed an instant’s suspicion that
Orlando was not the Orlando they had known. If any doubt there was in the human
mind the action of the deer and the dogs would have been enough to dispel it,
for [they] are far better judges both of identity and character than we are.”
Orlando’s dogs are unaffected by Orlando’s changed gender. They simply accept
the person they know and love. Orlando values their loyalty and keeps
her dogs close to her.

The gardens of her childhood home also continue to support her. When Orlando’s
friend, Mr. Pope, offends her with lines from his poem about the characters of
women, she turns to the outdoors to calm herself: “Orlando, to cool her cheeks,
for really she felt as if the little man had struck her, strolled in the nut
grove at the bottom of the garden. Soon the cool breezes did their work. To her
amazement she found that she was hugely relieved...” Orlando feels Mr. Pope’s
hurtful words almost physically and requires the outdoors to regain her composure. The
personified cool breezes act as soothing friends to Orlando.

While female Orlando consistently finds joy in her dogs and nature, she
continues to struggle with herself and others. As a woman in the 19th century,
Orlando meets another great love, Marmaduke Bonthrop Shelmerdine. Orlando
marries Marmaduke, and completes her life’s work, “The Oak Tree.” Despite her
happy marriage and singular literary achievement, Orlando can’t help but think,
“And if I were dead, it would be all the same!” No reality seems to protect her
mind from sudden convictions of meaninglessness. Neither male nor female Orlando
is better able to answer questions regarding human existence, nor to remain
entirely unburdened by their weight.

Socializing continues to disappoint her. Upon her homecoming after years
abroad, Orlando is accepted into English society. However, she arrives home from
a party one evening, in June of 1712, and bursts into tears: “What the devil is
the matter with me?” She wonders, “I don’t care if I never meet another soul as
long as I live...Is this...what people call life?” She feels guilty and confused
that she can be so unsatisfied surrounded by people, but she cannot deny that
she feels lonely and tired of superficial interactions.

While changing from man to woman may be the greatest outward change in Orlando’s
life, gender has no bearing on Orlando’s most enduring struggles and joys.
According to Orlando, “...through all these changes she had remained, she
reflected, fundamentally the same.”

---
References

Woolf, V. (2018). _Virginia Woolf: The Complete Works_. MyBooks Classics.
